International Organization Foundation

Coming to Terms
Author(s): Cameron Ballard-Rosa, Layna Mosley and Rachel L. Wellhausen
Source: International Organization, WINTER 2022, Vol. 76, No. 1 (WINTER 2022), pp. 32-69
Published by: Cambridge University Press on behalf of the International Organization
Foundation
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/27282788


JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.

Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms




            Cambridge University Press and International Organization Foundation are collaborating with JSTOR to
            digitize, preserve and extend access to International Organization




                                                      This content downloaded from
                                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign
Bond Denomination
Cameron Ballard-Rosa , Layna Mosley , and
Rachel L. Wellhausen


   Abstract       Governments interact strategically with sovereign bond market creditors:
   they make choices not only about how often and how much to borrow, but also under
   what terms. The denomination of debt, in domestic or foreign currency, is a critical part
   of these terms. The “original sin” logic has long predicted that creditors have little appe-
   tite for developing-country government debt issued in domestic currency. Our novel
   data, including bond issues by 131 countries in 240,000 primary market transactions
   between 1990 and 2016, suggest otherwise. Domestic-denominated bonds have come
   to dominate the market, although domestic-currency issuance often is accompanied
   by shorter bond maturities. We argue that ideologically rooted policy preferences
   play an important role in this unexpected trend in denomination. All else equal, right
   governments choose foreign denomination as a means of mitigating currency risk and
   thus minimizing borrowing costs. In contrast, left governments opt for the flexibility
   of domestic denomination, and they are better able to act on their preferences in the pres-
   ence of risk-mitigating monetary institutions and macroeconomic stability. We find
   support for our argument that partisanship has a robust and enduring relationship with
   denomination outcomes, even in a marketplace in which domestic-denominated de-
   veloping-country sovereign bonds have become the norm.




In the contemporary era of financial globalization, many countries have an unprece-
dented ability to issue sovereign bonds on international capital markets. In 1990,
twenty-one non-OECD countries issued bonds in international markets; this
number grew to forty-four by 1995. And in 2010, ninety-six non-OECD governments
issued international bonds. In our issue-level data on sovereign debt, we document
over 240,000 bond issues by 131 countries between 1990 and 2016. What is more,
developing-country sovereign issuers are not simply passive takers of supply-side
capital offerings. Developing-country governments make strategic choices over the
timing and amount of their sovereign bond issues.1 Here, we argue that their strategic
choices also concern the terms of the bond issued. These bond terms are important:
they influence countries’ future exposure to local and global crises, as well as to
financial market pressures.
   Bond terms provide governments an opportunity to trade off between borrowing
costs and refinancing risks. We focus on whether governments denominate debt in


  1. Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021.

International Organization 76, Winter 2022, pp. 32–69
© The IO Foundation 2021                                              doi:10.1017/S0020818321000357



                                     This content downloaded from
                   191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                             All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination         33


their own (domestic) currency or in foreign currency. Domestic debt denomination, in
particular, requires trade-offs that encapsulate classic ideological differences over
economic policy. In brief, right governments prefer foreign denomination as a
means of mitigating currency risk and thus minimizing borrowing costs, while left
governments prefer domestic denomination to maximize flexibility while transferring
currency risk to investors. Therefore, all else equal, we argue that left governments
are more likely to issue domestic-denominated debt, even as doing so may necessitate
trade-offs across other terms.
   Our theoretical logic and empirical evidence highlight the agency of developing-
country governments to bargain over the terms of their sovereign borrowing.
While it is clear that financial globalization gives these countries access to private
capital markets,2 the long-standing expectation has been that creditors largely set
the terms of their borrowing. Specifically, developing countries suffer, by virtue
simply of their status, from “original sin.”3 Thus developing-country sovereigns
must issue debt in foreign currencies to placate investors’ concerns. At the
extreme, “original sin” implies that demand for domestic-denominated debt from
developing countries is effectively zero. In a milder form, it suggests that creditors
and debtors will not agree on bond terms with domestic denomination because the
creditors’ demands for other bond terms to compensate for domestic-currency risk
would be so onerous.
   Strikingly, the empirical record upends these “original sin” expectations. Our
issue-level data make the trend clear: 56 percent of non-OECD sovereign debt
issued in 1990 was domestic-currency-denominated, 82 percent in 1995, and 92
percent in 2010. In recent years, countries including Brazil, Colombia, Venezuela,
and Bolivia have refinanced outstanding foreign-currency debt to denominate in
their own currencies. In the contemporary marketplace, domestic-denominated de-
veloping-country sovereign bond issues have become the norm. As we note later,
structural aspects of contemporary international capital markets shed some light on
why “original sin” expectations have been sidelined. The global investor base has
grown dramatically; many governments have worked to create or deepen markets
for local currency debt; and international financial institutions have worked with
developing-country governments to professionalize the debt management offices
(DMOs) responsible for issuing sovereign bonds. Liquid global capital markets
offer opportunities, therefore, for many sovereign borrowers. Regardless, fully
explaining this empirical pattern requires theoretical work to understand how cred-
itors and debtors are frequently able to reach terms that reflect creditors’ appetite
for, or at least acceptance of, domestic-currency-denominated debt.
   Yet it would be a mistake to interpret the surge of domestic denomination as evi-
dence that government desires to denominate in domestic currency are now costless,
uncontested, or foregone. For example, a fierce debate raged in India in mid-2019,


  2. Bunte 2019; Mosley 2003; Tomz 2007.
  3. Eichengreen and Hausmann 1999; Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza 2005.




                                This content downloaded from
              191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
34    International Organization


after the Indian government proposed issuing the country’s first-ever non-rupee-
denominated sovereign bonds; current and past policymakers clashed over the pro-
posal in a plethora of prominent opinion pieces in India’s major newspapers.4 This
contestation over debt denomination reveals the real and perceived trade-offs in
play when governments bargain with creditors over the terms of their borrowing.
While domestic-currency denomination is far more available to developing-country
governments than it was decades ago, it nonetheless entails trade-offs on other
terms of debt, as well as on other elements of economic policy. Distributional conflict
related to these trade-offs is at the heart of governments’ currency-denomination
choices.
   Therefore, we approach the dramatic shift in debt denomination by focusing on the
role of debtor governments in bargaining over the terms of their bond issues. Many
analyses of sovereign debt focus on the supply (creditor) side of the market: inves-
tors’ assessments of default risk—and their resulting offers of bond terms—vary as
a function of various political institutions, macroeconomic outcomes, and other
past outcomes.5 Implicit in these analyses is the assumption that developing-
country sovereigns have little bargaining power vis-à-vis investors; while these
governments may have domestically driven preferences over how they borrow,
these preferences have scant influence over the bargains made with investors.
   However, despite their apparent lack of bargaining power vis-à-vis official cred-
itors,6 developing-country governments often interact with multilateral financial
institutions and individual donor governments in ways that reflect domestic consid-
erations.7 Developing-country governments may use conditional lending to tie their
political rivals’ hands, avoid external financing conditions that threaten their own pol-
itical survival, and use foreign aid revenues as a means of domestic credit-claiming.8
   We claim that the same pattern holds in the realm of private market sovereign
bonds. Governments’ preferences over economic policy, rooted in domestic politics,
shape not only their demands around sovereign borrowing but also the outcomes of
their bargaining interactions with creditors. Governments’ preferences regarding
sovereign debt denomination fall along traditional partisan lines. Left governments
especially prefer domestic denomination, which transfers currency risk to investors.
This frees the government from worry about the implications of currency depreciation
or exchange rate volatility for the government’s capacity to repay its obligations.
Investors, however, require compensation for taking on currency risk, even in the
context of liquid financial markets. Indeed, using our issue-level data on currency,



   4. We thank Vashishtha Doshi for discussions and for sharing a collection of such pieces, from sources
including the Times of India, Telegraph India, Hindu Business Line, Business Standard, Economic Times,
Mumbai Mirror, Business Today, and LiveMint.
   5. Barta and Johnston 2018; Gray 2013; Mosley 2003; Mosley, Paniagua, and Wibbels 2020; Tomz
2007.
   6. Stone 2011.
   7. Bunte 2019; Copelovitch 2010.
   8. Cruz and Schneider 2017; Vreeland 2003.




                                      This content downloaded from
                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination            35


maturity, and yield, we find descriptive evidence consistent with costs to domestic
denomination. Moreover, we find that left governments are more likely to denomin-
ate in domestic currency in the presence of domestic institutions that blunt investors’
concerns over currency risk, specifically politically independent central banks or
credibly fixed exchange rates. At the same time, left governments are less likely to
issue in domestic currency in the context of a crisis, when investors are more sensitive
to risks of holding foreign-currency-denominated assets.
   On the other side of the partisan divide, we find that right governments are, all else
equal, less likely to denominate their bonds in domestic currency. While right govern-
ments may sometimes employ domestic-currency denomination, especially when the
market-based costs of doing so are low, their ideological preferences for monetary
restraint and fiscal discipline result in a favorable view of foreign-currency denomin-
ation. That is, the constraints generated by foreign-currency borrowing are attractive:
they limit the appeal of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, both to right gov-
ernments and to their successors. These systematic, partisan-based differences in how
sovereigns issue bonds highlight the importance of demand-side preferences to deter-
mining outcomes in debt markets. Our logic also reinforces the notion that, despite
the competitive pressures generated by economic globalization, political ideology
remains an important factor in shaping governments’ policy decisions,9 even in
developing countries.
   We use our issue-level data to illustrate the striking trend in domestic-currency
denomination and situate it within broader global trends. We then develop our
argument that domestic partisanship is a key, and enduring, determinant of debt
denomination, even as creditors are generally more accepting of domestic-currency-
denominated bonds. We present descriptive statistics, regression results, and robustness
tests consistent with the importance of government ideology to debt denomination,
across developing countries and throughout the time period. Moreover, we find
that the relationship between left governments and domestic-currency debt is stron-
gest in the presence of currency-risk-mitigating politically independent central
banks or credibly fixed exchange rates. In contrast, left governments are less likely
to denominate in domestic currency in the context of inflation or currency crises.
We conclude by considering priorities for future research on the domestic politics
of sovereign borrowing, as well as the persistence of developing-country currencies
in global credit markets.


Trends in Developing-Country Sovereign Debt

While bond-based financing is not the only source of credit on which governments
rely,10 bond issuance on international markets is a very common form of financing


   9. Garrett 1998.
  10. Blommestein and Horman 2007; Gelpern 2018; Kaplan and Thomsson 2017.




                                This content downloaded from
              191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
36    International Organization


for many developing countries, including many that previously were able to borrow
only from official sources such as bilateral creditors or regional development banks.11
This increased access has occurred in the context of significant increases in global
capital market liquidity as well as the financialization of much economic activity.12
Today the investor base for developing-country sovereign debt spans institutional
investors, hedge funds, commercial banks, foreign central banks, sovereign wealth
funds, and retail investors.13 This growth in the number and type of creditors dove-
tails with contemporary demand for a wide and diversified range of investment instru-
ments.14 Moreover, many developing-country governments have increased domestic
demand for their debt instruments through the privatization of their social security
systems. Private or semi-private pension funds often prefer (and may be required)
to hold their sovereign’s debt.15
   Governments also have taken actions to increase the perceived quality of their sover-
eign debt offerings. In particular, the IMF, the World Bank, and various regional
development banks have encouraged the professionalization of the national DMOs
responsible for issuing and managing government portfolios. Though DMO policies
have not fully converged, many developing countries now grant DMOs autonomy
from elected officials and prioritize hiring staff with private-sector experience.16
More professionalized DMOs are better able to liaise with private market actors, to
analyze and time the supply-side dynamics of global markets, and to learn from
the issuance choices of peer countries.17 The correlation between these risk-mitigat-
ing actions and the growth of sovereign-bond-based financing suggests that develop-
ing-country governments have had success in addressing concerns over default risk;
while these sovereigns often borrow at higher interest rates than their OECD counter-
parts, they nonetheless have access to bond issuance in private capital markets.
   Still, the expansion of sovereign bond markets does not in itself suggest that investors
have ceased to worry about currency risk. Governments face the temptation to erode the
real value of debts denominated in their currency, over which they have sovereign
control.18 Domestic currencies often suffer volatility as well as depreciation, especially
in developing-country contexts. Developing-country governments that want to borrow
must therefore address investors’ concerns with currency risk, labeled “original sin.”19


   11. Bunte 2019; Zeitz 2019.
   12. Brooks, Cunha, and Mosley 2015; Presbitero et al. 2016.
   13. Chwieroth 2009; Datz 2008. On the implications of variation in the investor base for fiscal consoli-
dation, see Rommerskirchen 2020.
   14. Mosley 2003.
   15. Betz and Pond 2019. Note that, just like foreign investors, domestic investors may hold domestic- or
foreign-currency-denominated debt. Countries sometimes collect information on the nationality and type of
the initial purchasers of debt, but these need not reflect the ultimate bondholders after secondary market
transactions.
   16. Melecky 2007, 2012; Sadeh and Porath 2020; Sadeh and Rubinson 2018.
   17. Brooks, Cunha, and Mosley 2015.
   18. Ottonello and Perez 2019.
   19. Eichengreen and Hausmann 1999; Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza 2005. See Aizenman et al.
2020 and Engel and Park 2018 for more on the “original sin” literature in economics.




                                      This content downloaded from
                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                         37


   A direct way for a government to overcome this constraint is to tie its own hands at
the point of issue, by denominating its offerings in a foreign currency, over which it
has no control. The borrowing government assumes currency risk; it must generate
foreign exchange to pay back or refinance debt obligations. At its starkest, “original
sin” predicts no possibility for developing-country sovereigns to issue domestic-
denominated debt. By virtue of their status, these sovereigns cannot assuage inves-
tors’ concerns regarding currency risk. A more modest version of the “original sin”
logic implies that it would be extraordinarily costly (in interest rate and/or maturity
terms) for a developing-country government to place a domestic-denominated bond.
   In fact, our data show that these long-standing assumptions are flawed. “Original sin”
anticipates that developing countries rarely borrow in their own currencies. But as the
global market for developing-country sovereign debt has grown, the proportion of
domestic-denominated offerings has expanded dramatically. Figure 1 shows the explo-
sion in the percentage of sovereign debt issued in domestic currencies, in both OECD
and non-OECD countries.20 Many governments have refinanced outstanding foreign-
denominated debt into domestic-currency debt, including Brazil, Colombia, and
Venezuela.21 For instance, in 2010, Bolivian officials proudly reported that Bolivia
had cut dollar-denominated debt to 78 percent, from 95 percent, in just four years.22
   The boom in domestic-denominated debt and the easing of the “original sin” con-
straint partly reflect the overall growth of sovereign bond markets. Recent scholarship
speaks more precisely to the determinants of this boom. For instance, in economics,
scholarship ties demand to global liquidity;23 considers denomination and domestic
economic conditions in a model of optimal monetary policy;24 and argues that eco-
nomic expansion and inflation stabilization in emerging markets help account for
this shift.25 In international political economy, scholarship identifies how govern-
ments can use their regulatory power to increase domestic investors’ holdings of
their sovereign debt,26 and how African countries like Ghana have attracted
foreign investors to domestic bond markets.27
   Within this general trend, however, variation remains. Although domestic-cur-
rency issuance is not only possible but quite popular, some sovereigns persist in



   20. This pattern extends even to the subset of non-investment-grade, non-OECD sovereigns.
“Investment grade” is defined as a rating of BBB– or higher from Standard and Poor’s or Fitch, or
Baa3 or higher from Moody’s.
   21. World Bank 2006.
   22. Walter Brandimarte, “Update 2: Bolivia Plans International Bond Issue by 2012,” Reuters, 22 April
2010.
   23. Borri and Shakhnov 2018.
   24. Engel and Park 2018.
   25. Ottonello and Perez 2019.
   26. Betz and Pond 2019; Pond and Betz 2019.
   27. Zeitz 2019. Others note that, for many sub-Saharan African countries, much debt remains foreign-
currency-denominated, creating higher risk for debtor governments. See Brahima S. Coulibaly, Dhruv
Gandhi, and Lemma W. Senbet, “Is Sub-Saharan Africa Facing Another Systemic Sovereign Debt
Crisis?” Africa Growth Initiative policy brief, <https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2019/04/
africa_sovereign_debt_sustainability.pdf>.




                                  This content downloaded from
                191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
38                    International Organization


tying their hands via foreign denomination. For example, in 2012, the relatively
creditworthy government of Costa Rica chose to issue eurobonds.28 The government
touted the historically low interest rate, achieved in part by denominating in foreign
currency.29 In 2019, Costa Rica explored refinancing some debt on more favorable
terms; it again did so with foreign-denominated issues.30 Also in 2019, Indian policy-
makers traded barbs in the press over the government’s proposal to issue foreign-
denominated bonds.31


                                1




 Proportion domestic currency
                                .8


                                .6




     issuance (by value)
                                .4


                                .2

                                                                                                     OECD countries
                                0                                                                    Non-OECD countries

                                 1990     1995        2000        2005        2010        2015

FIGURE 1. Trends in denomination of non-OECD sovereign bond issues (1990–2016)


   We focus on the enduring role of politics in denomination choices: governments
assign different weightings in the trade-off between flexibility (facilitated by domes-
tic-currency issuance) and costs on other terms (specifically, maturity structures and
interest rates). Because government preferences over these elements vary as a func-
tion of ideology, currency denomination choices remain contested and politically
relevant, despite broad trends in the sovereign debt market.


   28. Note that “eurobond” refers to a bond that is denominated in a currency other than that used by the
issuing entity. The vast majority of eurobonds are denominated in US dollars; others are denominated in
yen or euros.
   29. The rate was 4.25 percent (L. Arias, “Eurobond Sales to Help Costa Rica Pay Down Debt,” Tico
Times, 23 November 2012).
   30. IMF, “Costa Rica: Staff Concluding Statement of the 2019 Article IV Mission,” 25 February 2019.
   31. See again note 4. According to our data, since the mid-2000s developing-country debt in foreign cur-
rencies has averaged around 10 percent of all issuance (Figure 1).




                                                          This content downloaded from
                                        191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                             39


Theory and Hypotheses: Denomination and Partisanship

We contend that developing-country governments can have significant agency in
structuring credit market transactions. Empirically, we document that investors (the
supply side of credit markets) are willing to accept domestic denomination
(Figure 1); our theoretical expectation is that creditors use other bond terms to com-
pensate for that choice, consistent with a weaker version of the “original sin” logic.
We therefore focus our theoretical logic on the demand-side preferences of govern-
ments. Specifically, we argue that government ideology has an important influence
on how developing-country governments structure their interactions with sovereign
credit markets. We theorize that consistent ideological preferences over denomination
play a role above and beyond broader trends in international debt markets. This aligns
with the empirical pattern in which investors have been willing to accept partisan
differences in debt denomination.
   We expect left governments to take advantage disproportionately of the market-
based opportunity to borrow in their own currencies. Left governments have a
well-earned reputation for distinct preferences over economic and social policy
compared to their centrist/other and right counterparts. A long literature in compara-
tive politics roots left governments’ distinct ideological preferences in the fact that
their constituents hold more of their assets in human capital (labor) than in financial
capital (business).32 Risks to left parties’ core constituents stem largely from the com-
modification of labor and the resulting exposure to labor market disruptions.33
Broadly, this results in left parties focusing on unemployment at the expense of infla-
tion,34 and on limiting market-generated inequality.35 Left parties typically prioritize
providing social protection, redistributing income, and regulating industries.36 And
because left parties’ core constituents are less likely to be connected to globally
oriented financial institutions or to themselves invest in sovereign bonds, left govern-
ments will worry less about the potential erosion, via inflation and currency depreci-
ation, of the real value of domestic-denominated assets.
   Moreover, left governments tend to worry about the exposure to risk—for instance,
to exchange rate volatility—generated by international markets. Thus left parties have
been less likely to embrace financial liberalization.37 Domestic-currency denomin-
ation therefore reduces left governments’ worries about the potential tension
between enacting their preferred macroeconomic and microeconomic policies, on
the one hand, and servicing and repaying foreign-currency-denominated debts, on



   32. Alesina and Rosenthal 1995; Hibbs 1987, 1994.
   33. Esping-Andersen 1990.
   34. Carlsen 2000.
   35. Huber and Stephens 2012.
   36. Adams, Haupt, and Stoll 2008 attribute left parties’ consistent ideology and policy agenda in the face
of changing global economic conditions to their “long-term policy orientations” and particularities of their
organizational structures.
   37. Li and Smith 2002; Quinn and Inclan 1997.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
40    International Organization


the other. Instead, domestic denomination keeps inflation in the government’s toolkit,
as a potential response to high debt burdens as well as to a sluggish economy. Thus
domestic denomination offers a pathway for left governments to privilege domestic
rather than foreign objectives.38
    Central to our theory is that left governments’ focus is on autonomy vis-à-vis
market forces, as they prefer to have more options for meeting the demands of
their core constituents. Much of the time, left governments do not break currency
pegs or run the printing presses, eroding their money’s value. Yet they do value
the possibility to do so, should domestic political or economic conditions demand
it. A key observable implication of our argument, therefore, is that left governments
consistently accept the costly trade-offs (on other features of sovereign bonds) neces-
sary to issue in domestic currency.
    Put differently, supply-side creditors insist on compensation for currency-related
risk.39 We expect governments issuing in domestic currency to consistently settle
on other, less favorable financial terms, the most important of which are shorter
maturities or higher yields.40 Evidence of less favorable maturity and/or yield in
the presence of domestic denomination matches our expectation that left governments
are consistently willing to compensate investors for autonomy, whether or not they
ultimately use that autonomy.
    Right governments, by contrast, prefer to issue debt in foreign currency. Right
parties traditionally privilege market-friendly policies, including monetary restraint,
fiscal discipline, trade and financial liberalization, and respect for private property
rights.41 Right parties’ constituents typically are capital owners, including financial
elites.42 Business interests tend to welcome the opportunities for diversification
and investment that come with capital account liberalization;43 in contrast to left
parties, they worry less about pressures on policies emanating from international
markets. Furthermore, right governments are likely to have constituents who invest
in government debt, and who appreciate assurances that the real value of their
assets is secure.44 Right governments also may view foreign-currency debt denomin-
ation as a means of tying the hands of their potential successors.45 When debt stock is
more foreign-denominated, subsequent governments will need to remain focused on
generating foreign exchange and on preserving the value of the domestic currency.



   38. Ballard-Rosa 2020; Simmons 1997.
   39. Supply-side currency-risk concerns also lead us to expect left governments to be more successful at
achieving domestic denomination in the presence of risk-mitigating institutions, such as an independent
central bank or a fixed exchange rate, and in the absence of financial crises; see Hypotheses 2, 3, and 4.
   40. For empirical support, see Table 1. We do not offer a theory quantifying trade-offs across denom-
ination, maturity, and yield in any given transaction; rather, our prediction is that evidence of trade-offs
should be recoverable from observed data.
   41. Garrett 1998; Leblang 2002.
   42. Przeworski and Wallerstein 1988.
   43. Li and Smith 2002; Quinn and Inclan 1997.
   44. Stasavage 2011.
   45. Bernard 2002.




                                       This content downloaded from
                     191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                              41


Thus right governments are relatively more willing to issue foreign-denominated debt
that curtails their own access to policy instruments like inflation.
   To be clear, when investors are willing to purchase domestic-denominated debt,
and the costs of doing so in terms of maturity and/or yield are sufficiently low, we
expect right governments to take advantage of issuing in domestic debt. In permissive
market environments, right governments will not always avoid domestic denomin-
ation. This is consistent with our argument that right governments’ preferences are
motivated in part by the costs of domestic versus foreign denomination.
Nevertheless, we contend that right governments’ ideological preference for
foreign denomination, all else equal, is enduring. Therefore, an observable implica-
tion of our argument is that there should exist significant differences between right
and left governments’ propensity for domestic denomination, controlling for global
market conditions. Given the empirical trend in domestic issuance, this implies that
we should recover significant left–right partisan differences in issuance throughout
the time period we analyze.46
   The subset of right governments which are motivated by economic nationalism
may also prefer domestic-denominated debt for different reasons. Economic nation-
alists broadly object to the notion of limiting domestic policy options vis-à-vis foreign
actors, including investors and intergovernmental institutions. Economic-nationalist
audiences may view domestic denomination as a sign of prestige or progress, consist-
ent with the country having greater autonomy from global pressures.47 Traditionally,
such nationalist claims emanate from the left, consistent with our theoretical predic-
tion regarding left preferences. However, in recent years especially, such claims have
emerged from the far-right end of the political spectrum. For example, in the 2019
debates in India over the (right) Modi government’s proposal to issue foreign-
denominated sovereign bonds, actors from the far right joined leftists in decrying
the proposal in economic-nationalist terms.48 Empirically, because our data end in
2016, we are able to exclude the most recent far-right phenomenon. Theoretically,
we contend that economic nationalism does not systematically characterize right
governments worldwide—our actors of interest—or right parties in general.49
   Our arguments that ideological preferences over debt denomination are meaningful
and enduring for parties on the left and the right also assume that, at the level of mass
politics, voters broadly recognize partisan ownership or “clarity of responsibility”
over different economic issues,50 and that party leaders craft their economic policy


   46. For evidence, see Figure 6.
   47. Harmes 2012.
   48. The far-right Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh (National Volunteer Organization) “said it was anti-pat-
riotic as it could create long-term risks for the economy, potentially allowing rich foreign nations and their
financial institutions to dictate the country’s policies” (“RSS Wing Calls on Govt Not to Issue Foreign
Currency Bonds,” Reuters, 16 July 2019).
   49. Should it come to do so, our theoretical expectations regarding rightist preferences would be com-
plicated. Even bigger would be the challenge to political science as a whole regarding the key drivers of
rightist economic policy.
   50. Parker-Stephen 2013.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
42    International Organization


choices with an eye to winning the support of certain constituencies, such as labor or
capital.51 We acknowledge that not all developing countries that issue bonds in global
markets have strong political competition. In less competitive systems, elite-level
competition is most important;52 different swaths of the selectorate are likely to
align with left versus right political parties. Persistent elite-level ideological differ-
ences mean that, even without mass-level partisan contestation, our partisan-based
theory of preference over denomination should generate distinct market outcomes.
   Our theory carries implicit expectations about centrist parties and parties that do
not fall neatly on the traditional left–right spectrum with reference to economic
policy. In emphasizing the enduring preferences of left and right governments, we
imply simultaneously that denomination preferences are not ex ante clear, meaning-
ful, or enduring for governments of centrist or other orientations. Thus our expecta-
tions of left and right governments should hold with regard to centrist and/or other
parties as the excluded category.

H1: All else equal, a right government is least likely to denominate sovereign debt in
domestic currency, while a left government is most likely to do so.

   Our expectations regarding left and right governments assume that governments
vary, and continue to vary, in their ideological predispositions and their resulting
policy choices. This assumption is consistent with scholarship that argues for the
continued relevance of partisanship, despite economic globalization. It is in
tension, however, with other scholarship which posits that market pressures forestall
left governments’ ability to enact their preferred economic policy outcomes. In fact,
both strands of scholarship inspire our next set of hypotheses concerning the condi-
tional effects of supply-side creditors’ preferences on the likelihood that left govern-
ments issue in domestic currency.
   On the one hand, a large body of scholarship finds significant evidence that parti-
san positions on economic policy are important.53 In general, left governments are
less inclined to engage in financial liberalization.54 Left governments are also asso-
ciated with higher sustained increases in public investment,55 as well as with
higher levels of spending in response to crises.56 And even when countries have
signed preferential trade agreements, newly elected left governments often impose
new barriers to trade.57 These distinctive policies appear in both developed and



  51. Bisgaard 2015.
  52. Bueno de Mesquita et al. 2005.
  53. Campello 2015; Kurzer 1993; Mosley 2003; Pinto 2013.
  54. Brooks and Kurtz 2007; Chwieroth 2007; Li and Smith 2002. Historically, left governments have
been less inclined to privilege external commitments, such as the commitment to a fixed exchange rate,
over the capacity to intervene in the domestic economy. Simmons 1997.
  55. Gupta, Liu, and Mulas-Granados 2015.
  56. Muller, Storesletten, and Zilibotti 2016.
  57. Gray and Kucik 2017.




                                     This content downloaded from
                   191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                             All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                          43


developing countries. In Latin America, for instance, left governments are more
likely to pursue policies that seek to blunt rising inequality.58
   On the other hand, another body of scholarship argues that financial liberalization
and the attendant possibility of capital flight greatly constrain the capacity of left
parties to “act left” once in office.59 This research contends that private markets
are averse to the arrival in office of left-leaning political parties.60 They may worry
that left candidates would change investment policies, tax rates, public spending,
or existing contractual commitments.61 Left governments could face additional pres-
sure from international financial institutions to maintain or implement neoliberal,
Washington Consensus–style policies.62 Left governments therefore could run on
leftist economic policy platforms, but once in office find compelling incentives to
adopt more centrist or right-leaning policies.63 Left governments without access to
alternative financing sources, such as rents from natural resources,64 may be espe-
cially exposed to market pressures. This debate over whether left governments are
able to “act left” plays out in analyses of the politics of sovereign debt. Some
work identifies a significant role for partisanship in credit ratings and secondary
markets, for example, that credit ratings agencies award lower sovereign ratings to
left-governed countries, all else equal.65 Others argue that investors use partisan
cues as a shortcut when assessing political risk; increased bond spreads and capital
flight occur when the government swings significantly away from conservative incum-
bents.66 And in analyses including a range of developing countries, others find that
bond markets react to left governments via greater volatility in sovereign spreads.67
   In contrast, in other work we find no effect of partisanship on a crucial set of
outcomes in primary capital markets: the amount of sovereign debt issued by devel-
oping countries, and the timing of those issues.68 That research identifies changes in
supply-side market appetites for sovereign risk as key to the allocation of available
credit. Specifically, the long-discussed “democratic advantage” in sovereign debt
markets is contingent on the salience of sovereign risk to creditors. Secondary-
market scholarship suggests, among other things, that sovereign risk is shaped
by global market conditions,69 peer-group heuristics,70 central bank independence



  58. Huber and Stephens 2012.
  59. Garrett 1998.
  60. Cho 2014; Kaplan 2013.
  61. Jensen and Schmith 2005; Pinto 2013.
  62. Nelson 2014.
  63. Campello 2015; Stokes 2001.
  64. Campello 2015; Wibbels 2006.
  65. Barta and Johnston 2018.
  66. Vaaler, Schrage, and Block 2006. While this research sees stock market reactions to partisan shifts,
Frot and Santiso 2013 do not.
  67. Brooks, Cuhna, and Mosley 2021.
  68. Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021.
  69. Bauerle Danzman, Winecoff, and Oatley 2017; Rey 2013; Spanakos and Renno 2009; Wellhausen
2015.
  70. Brooks, Cunha, and Mosley 2015; Gray 2013.




                                  This content downloaded from
                191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
44    International Organization


(CBI),71 regime type,72 and elections.73 When investors are motivated to seek out
safer assets, developing-country democracies gain an advantage over nondemocra-
cies in issuing more sovereign debt, more often. However, holding the level of
democracy constant, there is no significant difference in the amount or timing of
debt issued by governments of different partisan orientations. This nonresult regard-
ing partisanship is consistent with the strand of literature finding that macro-policy
pressures from investors can constrain left parties from “acting left” once in office.
Although left governments have an underlying, demand-side preference for fiscal
flexibility and expansion, they nevertheless have difficulty achieving it by issuing
more debt more often. In contrast, our theory posits that left governments will find
it much easier to achieve their preferences for fiscal flexibility by choosing domestic
denomination, so much so that we expect to recover systematic, partisan empirical
patterns regardless of market conditions. Indeed, sovereign borrowers with similar
overall debt burdens and similar macroeconomic fundamentals often exhibit
marked variation in the currency denomination, maturity structure, and yield
profile of their debt.74
   At the point of issue in primary capital markets, creditors and sovereign debtors
agree on the terms (denomination as well as yield and maturity) of a specific sover-
eign debt instrument. This outcome represents the intersection of government
demand for and investor supply of debt. On the demand side, it reflects the govern-
ment’s willingness to agree to a set of terms, in exchange for the extension of credit.
On the supply side, it reflects investors’ assessment of country-specific and global
risk factors, again in the context of a specific set of bond terms. Our overall conten-
tion is that creditors are often willing to accept a set of terms that reflects distinctively
partisan preferences, specifically over debt denomination.
   However, investors’ willingness to accept domestic denomination is not unlimited.
Supply-side concerns about sovereign risk—including the worry that governments
will erode the value of domestic-currency instruments via inflation—remain.
Hence, investors require compensation for the added risk associated with partisan-
based demands for domestic-currency issuance. The need to offer compensation sug-
gests that a weak form of the “original sin” logic persists, even in a marketplace in
which investors have an appetite for domestic-denominated sovereign debt instru-
ments. Indeed, our arguments regarding partisan differences assume that issuing
domestic debt is not costless, and that investors require compensation for its added
risk. While we have emphasized that compensation to investors can occur via
other financial terms of a bond issue, specifically its maturity and/or yield, bonds



   71. Bodea and Hicks 2015, 2018; Johnson 2016.
   72. Beaulieu, Cox, and Saiegh 2012; North and Weingast 1989; Saiegh 2005; Schultz and Weingast
2003.
   73. Bernhard and Leblang 2006; Campello 2014; Mosley 2003.
   74. For example, Cox and Saiegh 2018 find that otherwise identical bonds issued by Argentina in
advance of the Baring crisis had markedly different price trajectories as a function of the funded status
of the instrument.




                                      This content downloaded from
                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                           45


also vary in their nonfinancial terms. For instance, some bonds have collective-action
clauses, intended to simplify restructuring in the case of a default.75 Bonds also vary
with regard to their governing law (which could be domestic or that of a major
market, such as London or New York) and their exchange listing. Although our
issue-level empirical data do not cover nonfinancial terms, our argument implies
that sovereign risk can further be addressed via trade-offs across such nonfinancial
terms at the point of issue.76
   Moreover, governments may compensate investors for currency risk via mechan-
isms beyond bond terms (financial or otherwise). For example, governments might
aim their offerings at different segments of their potential investor base, varying
the denomination of their offerings as investors’ time horizons or currency exposure
vary. Governments also might use regulatory requirements or tax incentives to con-
vince investors to hold their bonds.77 Alternatively, governments might seek some
credit outside private bond markets, from private commercial banks, bilateral official
creditors, or international financial institutions;78 these creditors may demand
compensation that is political or diplomatic, rather than explicitly economic.79
   We focus on the risk-mitigating effects of politically independent monetary insti-
tutions as well as fixed exchange rates. Such institutions enhance governments’ mon-
etary policy credibility, reducing demand-side risk concerns. Their presence can
therefore facilitate domestic-currency issuance. Thus sovereign borrowers that
prefer domestic denomination—that is, left governments—should be better able to
find willing creditors in the presence of such institutions.
   First, politically independent central banks are one mechanism that constrains poli-
ticians’ ability to act in ways contrary to market preferences. We follow a long litera-
ture suggesting that CBI may limit political leaders’ ability to intervene in the
macroeconomy in politically expeditious but economically damaging ways.80 With
an independent central bank, typically mandated to attend to inflation (sometimes
in balance with other goals like employment or economic growth), investors
should have more certainty that a left government will not inflate away the value
of domestic-denominated bonds. Thus, CBI should make it easier for left govern-
ments to issue such bonds.



  75. Weidemaier and Gulati 2016.
  76. Chamon, Schumacher, and Trebesch 2018 find evidence that, in secondary markets, foreign-law
bonds carry lower yields, especially in times of crisis. See also Bradley, De Lira Salvatierra, and Gulati
2016.
  77. Betz and Pond 2019.
  78. Bunte 2019; Mosley and Rosendorff n.d.; Zeitz 2019.
  79. The capacity of non-OECD governments to choose among a portfolio of potential creditors exists
more generally during recent decades, and it is especially pronounced when global liquidity is high, under-
scoring the importance of our empirical attentiveness to time-related and global market dynamics. Ballard-
Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021; Brooks, Cunha, and Mosley 2015; Miranda-Agrippino and Rey
2015.
  80. Barro and Gordon 1983; Bodea and Hicks 2018; Clark and Hallerberg 2000; Franzese 1999; Garriga
and Rodriguez 2020; Maxfield 1997.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
46    International Organization


H2: Left governments are more likely to denominate sovereign debt in domestic cur-
rency when the central bank is more independent, as opposed to less independent.

   A fixed exchange rate is another mechanism that can address investors’ concerns
that the real value of a domestic-currency bond at maturity will be significantly less
than its nominal value at issue. A country with a commitment to a fixed exchange
rate, generally tied to a major trading partner or source of capital, can generate
greater confidence among bondholders regarding the future value of the asset.81
Such an institution also should make it easier for left governments to place domes-
tic-denominated debt. That is, fixed exchange rates facilitate the supply-side dynam-
ics which allow left governments to achieve their partisan-based preferences.

H3: Left governments are more likely to denominate sovereign debt in domestic cur-
rency when the exchange rate is fixed rather than flexible.

  Finally, investors become more averse to risk—and therefore less willing to pur-
chase riskier assets like domestic-denominated bonds—in the face of inflation or cur-
rency crises. Left governments in particular will find it difficult to convince investors
of their commitment to preserving the value of domestically denominated assets,
given their well-known policy preferences that do not prioritize investors’ interests.
We therefore anticipate that, in periods marked by the current or recent occurrence
of currency and inflation crises, left governments will be less likely to engage in
domestic-currency debt denomination.82 This is not because crises change left gov-
ernments’ underlying preferences, but because supply-side concerns are severe
enough to swamp demand-side effects.

H4: Left governments are less likely to denominate sovereign debt in domestic
currency when the country experiences a monetary crisis, as opposed to noncrisis
conditions.

   Our first hypothesis focuses on the agency of governments to influence how they
access sovereign credit. We expect, unconditionally, that left and right governments
will act in significantly different ways. The remaining hypotheses highlight the role
of investors’ risk perceptions. These expectations are conditional, and they apply only
to left governments. Since we expect that right governments are already inclined to
market-friendly policies and the use of foreign-currency issuance, we do not have




   81. Mitchener and Weidemaier 2015 find that before World War I, adherence to the gold standard was
associated with significantly lower risk premiums for core countries. In peripheral countries, however, gold
standard adherence did not necessarily lower risk premiums, even many years after gold standard adoption.
   82. Cox and Saiegh 2018 also emphasize the importance of considering differential market facilitation of
bond issuance in crisis episodes.




                                       This content downloaded from
                     191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                           47


strict expectations regarding a further conditional effect of supply-side considerations
on right governments’ denomination outcomes.


Empirical Strategy

To test these hypotheses, we analyze a new data set of the terms of approximately
240,000 initial sovereign issues in primary capital markets by 131 countries from
1990 to 2016.83 Our data set covers the effective population of (non-US) sovereign
bonds issued on international markets. Given that currency risk in wealthy countries
is of limited concern to bond investors,84 and that the claim regarding “original sin”
refers to the developing world,85 we analyze the set of non-OECD countries that have
issued bonds in the period.
   The primary market—the point at which sovereign borrowers and creditors come
to agreement on the terms of bond issues—is the setting in which we can observe
governments’ current preferences over debt denomination. Each bond issue repre-
sents a transaction in which sellers (borrowing governments, often with assistance
from financial-sector underwriters) and buyers (investors) agree on issuance, regard-
ing both amount and terms. Our issue-level data include information on bond denom-
ination, maturity, and yield (interest rate). Note that our observational data do not
allow us to observe a government’s ideal point or requests with respect to terms;
instead, we observe where government preferences intersect sufficiently with
market demands to enable an issuance to occur.86 Following our hypotheses, our stat-
istical analyses assess not only what relationship, if any, partisanship has with out-
comes in primary bond markets, but also the extent to which outcomes are
conditioned by market expectations over future behavior as a function of political
institutions and financial crises. Our statistical models further account for supply-
side dynamics by including as control variables a set of features typically associated
with bond market outcomes.
   A common distinction in categorizing sovereign instruments separates “bills,” gen-
erally issued with a maturity of less than one year, and “bonds,” with maturities of one
year or more. Governments typically issue bills to facilitate short-term debt rollovers,
and it is less obvious whether these types of liquidity operations should be subject to
political considerations over currency denomination since investors are likely less
worried about wild fluctuations in exchange rates over short periods. In the longer
term, flexibility-versus-cost trade-offs are more consequential as governments face



   83. Data were gathered from Bloomberg terminals. We assume that any missing data are as-if randomly
distributed. We exclude countries with populations less than 100,000, as well as the United States because
the role of the dollar and the depth of the US market makes the US a significant outlier in many dimensions
of issuance.
   84. Mosley 2003.
   85. Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza 2005.
   86. All issues in the data are successful, in that they are fully placed with investors.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
48    International Organization


higher likelihoods of inflationary pressure and investors are more concerned with cur-
rency fluctuation and depreciation. Therefore, we estimate our main models using the
subsample of all bonds issued with a maturity of at least one year but all main results
are robust to using the full sample of all issues, regardless of maturity.87
   We conduct our analyses at the country-month level.88 Our main dependent vari-
able is the percentage of the value (amount) of a sovereign’s bonds issued in the coun-
try’s domestic currency, collapsed by country-month. This measure captures all
bonds issued in the currency within the control of the sovereign issuer. For instance,
issuance by the Ugandan government in Ugandan shillings is categorized as domestic
denomination, whereas issuance in any other currency is classified as foreign-
denominated.89 Our main political covariate of interest is government partisanship,
both unconditionally and as affected by economic institutions and crisis environ-
ments (Hypotheses 1–4). We rely on standard, widely available measures of govern-
ment partisanship, which allow us to test our hypotheses for a broad set of non-OECD
countries. Our main measure of executive partisanship comes from the Database of
Political Institutions (DPI). According to the DPI codebook, party orientation is
coded relative to economic policy, which is the appropriate focus for our setting.
Following standard practice, we characterize governments as “right,” “left,” or “cen-
trist/other.”90 This trichotomous division allows us to evaluate empirically whether
partisanship on the left or the right correlates with systematically different outcomes,
relative to the excluded category of centrist/other governments. To complement our
monthly data on bond denomination, we update these annual data on government par-
tisanship to the monthly level, using data on precise dates of electoral turnover.91 To
maximize data coverage, we first estimate models with the full sample of countries for
which the DPI codes government partisanship. We subsequently re-estimate our
primary models on democratic and nondemocratic subsamples, under the expectation
that government partisanship may be more informative in more democratic countries,
and given the extensive literature on the advantages democracies enjoy in accessing
international credit markets.92



   87. As reported in Appendix Tables A17 and A19.
   88. This is consistent with the unit of analysis in our recent work (Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen
2021) that demonstrate a strong empirical correlation between overall amount issued and the number of
months with issuances in a given country-year.
   89. Our argument turns on whether or not the sovereign has control over the currency; thus, the identity
of the foreign currency is irrelevant. US dollars are the dominant foreign currency choice throughout the
period.
   90. Left parties are those identified as communist, socialist, social democratic, or otherwise left. Right
parties are conservative, Christian democratic, or otherwise right. We place parties whose platform does
not focus on economic issues (coded 0) in the centrist/other category (Cruz, Keefer, and Scartascini
2018), although our main results are robust to instead dropping these observations entirely.
   91. The date on which the new government comes to power marks the beginning of the government’s
ability to issue debt; the (previous) election date is not relevant in our setting.
   92. Beaulieu, Cox, and Saiegh 2012; Biglaiser and Staats 2012; Schultz and Weingast 2003. We also
demonstrate the robustness of our results to alternative codings of partisanship and democracy from the
Varieties of Democracy (V-Dem) project.




                                       This content downloaded from
                     191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                          49


   Our other covariates of interest include CBI, which we dichotomize into those
above or below the sample median level (H2).93 We also code whether the exchange
rate is pegged (H3). To identify countries facing crisis environments, we include a
dummy that equals 1 if the country is facing an ongoing inflation crisis, and a
dummy that equals 1 if the country is facing an exchange rate crisis (H4).
   Given the observational nature of our data, it is important to account for additional
factors that might plausibly be correlated both with the currency composition of debt
issued in a country-month and with the partisan orientation of government.94 We
begin by including a set of baseline macroeconomic controls commonly associated
with borrowing capacity, including GDP per capita and GDP growth, to capture
the possibility that economic trajectories might vary with government partisanship.
In addition, if left governments prefer to engage in more expansionary spending,
there could be consequences for the market’s tolerance for government bond
terms. This leads us to control for the amount of existing external debt (% of
GDP) and the current account balance (% of GDP). To account for the possibility
that access to alternative sources of international capital could vary with government
partisanship, we control for trade (% of GDP), oil rents (% of GDP), and foreign
direct investment inflows (% of GDP).
   Beyond this baseline set of covariates, we subsequently introduce a fuller set of
controls that also might plausibly be jointly related to government partisanship and
bond terms. The inclusion of these additional variables, however, leads to nontrivial
reduction in our sample size. First, beyond the monetary crisis variables we prioritize
in hypothesis testing, it may also be that countries experiencing a sovereign debt
crisis find it harder to choose domestic denomination if the prospect of default
makes investors shy away from any other risky term; if government partisanship
also affects the likelihood that a country is in a crisis, lack of controls for these
factors might result in omitted-variable bias. We therefore include dummies for
current sovereign debt crises, as well as a dummy for the presence of an IMF
program, the terms of which could be biased in favor of right governments.95 We
also include a measure of capital account openness, addressing the possibility that
left governments are more likely to engage in restrictions on the capital account.96
We furthermore control for democracy with a continuous measure (V-Dem’s “poly-
archy” score), and we probe potential heterogeneity by regime type in the robustness
tests. All specifications include country fixed effects to capture country-specific, non-
time-varying determinants of our outcomes of interest.
   Perhaps the most important tasks in our empirical strategy are to account for the
dramatic secular increase in the number of developing-country bond issuers and in



  93. Calculated from the weighted measure in Garriga 2016. Data sources for all variables are provided in
Appendix Table A1.
  94. Consistent with standard practice, all controls are measured annually unless otherwise specified.
  95. Nelson 2014.
  96. Chinn and Ito 2006; Quinn and Inclan 1997.




                                  This content downloaded from
                191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
50    International Organization


the proportion of domestic-currency issuance over our period. We must address
changes in the sovereign debt marketplace generally, before isolating the persistent
role of partisan factors. Indeed, recent work on the tolerance of bond investors for
country-level politics emphasizes that the international yield environment plays an
important role.97 To account for the possible effect of global capital cycles on our
results, we also include in our baseline controls a monthly varying measure of the
interest rate on ten-year US Treasury bonds, which are generally taken as the
world’s least risky asset.
   To capture possible secular movements in our data, we introduce to all specifications
a cubic polynominal in time.98 To address simultaneity bias, we lag all right-hand-side
measures by one year (as these data vary at the annual level), save our monthly mea-
sures of partisanship and the US ten-year Treasury interest rate, which are lagged by
one month. Finally, note that our outcome of interest (percent domestic issuance) is
observed in only country-months in which issuance actually occurs; when no issuance
takes place, we cannot measure the proportion of debt in a given currency, and so treat
these as missing. Therefore, while we use OLS with standard errors clustered by
country as our baseline estimation method, as discussed in the appendix our results
are robust when we employ a Heckman selection model to account for the possibility
of selection bias in months in which issuance occurs (Table A23).99


Results

Here, we present descriptive evidence consistent with our argument and its implica-
tions; report results supportive of Hypotheses 1–4; and report robustness analyses and
extensions.

Descriptive Preliminaries
We begin by verifying that patterns in our data are consistent with the logic of our
arguments. First, our claims regarding partisanship rest on the notion that, while “ori-
ginal sin” no longer precludes the issuance of domestic-denominated bonds, these
instruments nonetheless carry significant currency risk for investors. Thus develop-
ing-country governments should compensate investors, in some way or another,
for taking on these risks. The clearest and most direct means of doing so is via the
other terms of the bond. Our issue-level data allow us to examine maturity and


   97. Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021; Borri and Shakhnov 2018.
   98. Carter and Signorino 2010. In alternative specifications, to remove the effect of any shared common-
ality in currency issuance across all countries within a given year, we have replaced this time trend with
year fixed effects; our primary results are not sensitive to the exclusion of either the temporal cubic poly-
nomial or the inclusion of year fixed effects.
   99. Note that, as we found elsewhere (Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021), there is no evidence
of systematic partisan differences in timing or amount of issuance, so we expect these problems to be of
limited concern.




                                       This content downloaded from
                     191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                              51


interest rate (often called the “coupon” for bonds), two key financial terms of any
bond, sovereign or otherwise. We expect that domestic denomination requires
issuers to trade off by offering shorter maturities and higher yields.100
   Table 1 explores this expectation via OLS regressions of the percent of domestic-
currency issuance (by month) on the average maturity and interest rate of sovereign
bonds issued (by month), including our full set of controls.101 Note that choices of
denomination, maturity, and interest rates are made at the same time; these regres-
sions explore only associations and cannot be interpreted with reference to causality.
We do indeed find domestic denomination to be significantly correlated with shorter
average maturities (columns 1 and 3), as should be expected if investors tend to prefer
to hold debt with shorter maturities in exchange for allowing governments to issue
bonds in their own currency. And while when entered by itself the interest rate
does not appear to be systematically associated with currency denomination
(column 2), when entered jointly with maturity we recover a positive and statistically
significant association between the average coupon (interest rate) charged on bonds a
country issues and the proportion of this debt issued in domestic currency. This posi-
tive association between interest rates and domestic-currency issuance is consistent
with a view that investors are likely (once maturity is taken into account) to charge
governments an interest rate premium for the implied risk of holding domestic-cur-
rency debt. These associations between denomination, maturity, and interest rates
provide prima facie evidence that domestic denomination carries costs with regard
to other financial terms, which increases the plausibility of our argument that choos-
ing it is a strategic decision.102 We leave the development of a theory of how DMOs
optimize across denomination, maturity, and yield for future research.103
   Before moving on to test our primary hypotheses, we also re-emphasize that while
interest rates, denomination, and maturity are key bond terms, bonds also vary in their
nonfinancial terms. Unfortunately, because the Bloomberg information on which our
data set is based often does not report these nonfinancial terms—reporting governing
law for only 20 percent of our observations, for instance—we are unable to



   100. Debt instruments with shorter maturities typically present less risk to investors because they need to
worry about only government ability and willingness to repay over the term of the issue. Shorter maturities,
however, heighten risks for borrowing governments as governments must more frequently return to capital
markets to roll over their debt. Longer time to maturity insulates governments from the need to refinance
debt earlier and more frequently.
   101. Monthly averages are a more appropriate unit of analysis than issue-level terms because DMOs can
package a set of near-simultaneous individual issues that, taken together, provide compensation. One cred-
itor can therefore receive compensation by buying the whole package. Because our data do not record the
initial buyer, the monthly average allows us to best account for this phenomenon.
   102. In their recent analysis of eight emerging-market countries, Aizenman et al. 2020 similarly find that
domestic-currency bonds tend to have shorter maturities, as well as to be smaller in size and have a lower
coupon rate than foreign currency bonds. See also Arellano and Ramanarayanan 2012.
   103. As a preliminary exercise, we report in the appendix that we do not find that these trade-offs across
maturity, interest rates, and currency denomination vary by decade, as could arise if DMO professionaliza-
tion systematically altered the market tolerance of these trade-offs over time (Tables A7 and A13). We do
not expect nor find evidence that the magnitude of the trade-off varies with ideology (Table A25).




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
52     International Organization


systematically assess their relationship with denomination. Nonetheless, our argu-
ment implies that, in addition to the relationships between financial terms shown
in Table 1, sovereign risk could be addressed via trade-offs across nonfinancial
terms.104 Moreover, governments may compensate investors for currency risk via
mechanisms beyond bond terms (financial or otherwise). Our conditional
Hypotheses 2 and 3 postulate that domestic economic institutions—specifically,
CBI and a fixed exchange rate—can have such compensatory effects.


TABLE 1. Domestic currency issuance and other bond terms


                                              (1)                               (2)                               (3)
Variables                                  % domestic                        % domestic                        % domestic


AVERAGE MATURITY                           −0.019***                                                            −0.020***
                                            (0.003)                                                              (0.003)
AVERAGE COUPON                                                                   0.000                            0.005**
                                                                                (0.003)                          (0.002)
Baseline controls                               ✓                                  ✓                                 ✓
Full controls                                   ✓                                  ✓                                 ✓

Observations                                 8,187                              8,187                            8,187
R-squared                                    0.146                              0.087                            0.149
Number of countries                            79                                 79                               79

Notes: This table reports results of OLS regressions of domestic currency issuance (by month) on alternative terms of
bonds (by month), as well as a set of control variables defined earlier. Country fixed effects are suppressed, as is a cubic
polynomial in time. *p < 10; **p < .05; ***p < .01.
Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.


   Next, for partisanship to be consequential for the choice of domestic denomination as
we predict, it would be problematic if left governments in developing countries simply
issued more sovereign bonds altogether. Figure 2 shows that, if anything, right govern-
ments issue more debt through sovereign bonds, while center governments issue roughly
the same amount as left governments. However, partisanship does not remain a signifi-
cant determinant of the amount of debt issued (as a percent of GDP, by country-month)
in a multivariate regression framework.105 Thus, while left governments might generally
be associated with expectations of higher debt levels, they are not systematically acquir-
ing more debt via sovereign bond issues on international markets.
   Our argument about partisanship would also be less credible if the proportion of left,
right, or center parties in non-OECD countries changed radically over the period. But
Figure 3 shows that this is not the case. Even with phenomena like the mid-2000s Pink
Tide in Latin America, the proportion of left and right governments has remained rela-
tively stable, and relatively balanced, over this period, with both slightly declining in



  104. Bradley, De Lira Salvatierra, and Gulati 2016; Chamon, Schumacher, and Trebesch 2018.
  105. See Appendix Table A5. See also Ballard-Rosa, Mosley, and Wellhausen 2021.




                                          This content downloaded from
                        191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                  All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                                                      Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination        53


                                                .01




     Proportion of issues, average 1990−2016
                                               .008


                                               .006


                                               .004


                                               .002


                                                 0
                                                               Right                   Center/Other                Left

FIGURE 2. Average amount of sovereign bond issuance (per GDP, monthly) by non-
OECD countries

recent years. If anything, these data suggest the growth of centrist/other governments in
recent years. These trends also increase our confidence that our measure of partisanship
is not obviously biased toward attaching our specific, economic partisan preferences of
interest to too many rather than too few governments.106


Hypothesis Testing
Table 2 reports results evaluating Hypothesis 1, that left (right) governments uncon-
ditionally issue a greater percentage of domestic- (foreign-) denominated sovereign
bonds. First, column 1 reports results from a simple bivariate regression, in which
we find that left governments are associated with a significantly greater share, and
right governments a significantly smaller share, of bonds issued in domestic currency
relative to the excluded category of center/other governments. Column 2 confirms
that this relationship holds when we include our baseline controls, and column 3
reports support when including other covariates of interest.107 The partisan differ-
ences we detect in domestic debt denomination appear to be a function of both left


   106. Figures are based on our main DPI partisanship measure. We use the V-Dem measure of partisan-
ship as a robustness check. We similarly do not find evidence of an overwhelming shift toward one end of
the ideological spectrum over our time period.
   107. Note that, in moving from column 2 to 3, we lose eight countries and nearly 3,000 observations;
also, annual data end in 2012 due to lack of more recent data for several covariates. Interestingly, very
few of the other included covariates appear systematically related to currency of issuance.




                                                                        This content downloaded from
                                                      191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                                                All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
54                            International Organization


                                1




  Proportion of governments
                              .75



                               .5



                              .25

                                                                                                          Left
                                                                                                          Right
                                                                                                          Center/Other
                                0
                                    1990      1995         2000          2005         2010         2015

                              FIGURE 3. Trends in partisanship, non-OECD governments, 1990 to 2016


and right ideologies (Hypothesis 1). That is, right governments also appear to be
acting on their distinct preferences over denomination (relative to centrist/other gov-
ernments) even in a permissive marketplace.
   Next, we evaluate the effects of partisanship conditional on other covariates that
can affect investors’ evaluations of governments’ propensity to maintain the value
of domestic-denominated debt and, therefore, investors’ exposure to currency risk.
Figure 4 reports differences in currency of issuance across government partisanship
when interacted with a dummy for high CBI (Hypothesis 2).108 We do indeed find
that left governments in developing countries with high CBI are significantly more
likely to issue debt in domestic currency. Results conditional on a pegged exchange
rate are similar: left governments issue a greater proportion of domestic-denominated
bonds under a pegged exchange rate (Hypothesis 3). These findings are consistent
with our argument that left governments take advantage of credibility-enhancing
institutions that improve their ability to make choices in line with their ideological
preferences.
   We have argued that, as right governments’ preferences for foreign-currency
denomination largely square with the preferences of investors, it is not clear theor-
etically whether we should expect similar partisan differences from right governments




  108. Full regression results for this and subsequent figures are reported in Appendix Table A3.




                                                             This content downloaded from
                                           191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                   Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                                    55


TABLE 2. OLS regressions, domestic currency issuance


                                                                  (1)                  (2)                    (3)
Variables                                                     No controls            Baseline            Full controls


RIGHT GOVERNMENT                                               −0.069*              −0.066*               −0.075**
                                                                (0.036)              (0.034)               (0.033)
LEFT GOVERNMENT                                                  0.087*               0.092**               0.109**
                                                                (0.046)              (0.045)               (0.044)
GDP PER CAPITA                                                                      −0.017                −0.047
                                                                                     (0.049)               (0.052)
GDP GROWTH (ANNUAL %)                                                                 0.003                 0.002
                                                                                     (0.002)               (0.002)
EXTERNAL DEBT (% OF GDP)                                                              0.001                 0.001
                                                                                     (0.001)               (0.001)
CURRENT ACCOUNT BALANCE (% OF GDP)                                                    0.001                 0.003
                                                                                     (0.002)               (0.003)
TRADE (% OF GDP)                                                                      0.001               −0.000
                                                                                     (0.001)               (0.001)
OIL RENTS (% OF GDP)                                                                −0.004                −0.002
                                                                                     (0.004)               (0.006)
FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENT, NET INFLOWS (% OF GDP)                                     0.000                 0.001
                                                                                     (0.000)               (0.002)
US TREASURY RATE                                                                      0.016**               0.022***
                                                                                     (0.006)               (0.008)
PEGGED EXCHANGE RATE                                                                                      −0.006
                                                                                                           (0.032)
HIGH CENTRAL BANK INDEPENDENCE                                                                              0.011
                                                                                                           (0.031)
CHINN-ITO INDEX                                                                                             0.005
                                                                                                           (0.014)
IMF PROGRAM IN PLACE                                                                                      −0.045
                                                                                                           (0.028)
CURRENCY CRISIS                                                                                           −0.010
                                                                                                           (0.021)
INFLATION CRISIS                                                                                          −0.223***
                                                                                                           (0.056)
SOVEREIGN DEBT CRISIS                                                                                       0.102
                                                                                                           (0.074)
DEMOCRACY (V-DEM)                                                                                         −0.012
                                                                                                           (0.137)
Observations                                                    12,179                11,023                 8,163
R-squared                                                        0.070                 0.073                 0.113
Number of countries                                               103                   87                     79

Notes: This table reports results of OLS regressions of the proportion of domestic currency issuance (by month) on
government partisanship (by month, lagged) and varying sets of controls. Country fixed effects are suppressed, as is a
cubic polynomial in time. *p < 10; **p < .05; ***p < .01.
Robust standard errors clustered by country in parentheses.




with strong institutional protections for the value of the domestic currency. As
reported in Figure 4, in the presence of strong CBI, right governments appear even
more likely to choose foreign over domestic denomination; this suggests that the
right’s ideological commitment to forego domestic denomination complements the
ideological commitment to CBI. When the exchange rate is fixed, the point estimate
suggests that right governments are even less likely to denominate in domestic




                                     This content downloaded from
                   191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                             All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
56                            International Organization




                                    1.00




     Proportion domestic currency
                                    0.90

                                    0.80

                                    0.70

                                    0.60

                                    0.50                                                                Right
                                                                                                        Center/Other
                                                                                                        Left
                                    0.40
                                                 Low CBI                           High CBI




                                    1.00




     Proportion domestic currency
                                    0.90

                                    0.80

                                    0.70

                                    0.60

                                    0.50                                                                Right
                                                                                                        Center/Other
                                                                                                        Left
                                    0.40
                                                 Not fixed                         Fixed XR

  Note: The left panel conditions on a dichotomous measure of CBI, while the right panel
  conditions on a dummy for fixed exchange rates (95% confidence intervals).

FIGURE 4. Effect of government partisanship on proportion of domestic-currency
debt issued




                                                             This content downloaded from
                                           191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                            57


currency, although this difference is not statistically significant at conventional levels.
This would be consistent with the right’s ideological preference to “bind the hands”
of successor governments, expressed via both denomination choice and a fixed
exchange rate.
   Yet, left governments’ credibility may be undermined by ongoing macroeconomic
instability; crises affecting the value of the currency can therefore undermine a left gov-
ernment’s ability to come to terms that include domestic denomination (Hypothesis 4).
First, we expect that cases of rampant inflation, as a particularly relevant kind of eco-
nomic mismanagement likely to drive subsequent devaluation, will suggest to investors
increased currency risk. Figure 5 reports the results of an interaction of government par-
tisanship with ongoing inflation crisis. We find that left governments not currently
facing crisis remain capable of issuing a significantly greater percentage (compared
to centrist/other or right governments) of domestic-denominated bonds; interestingly,
in countries facing runaway inflation, left governments’ denomination outcomes
appear indistinguishable from their centrist/other counterparts.
   Second, we expect that a crashing exchange rate during a currency crisis makes
investors especially reluctant to buy or hold domestic-denominated bonds, and that
this reluctance particularly affects left governments given their denomination prefer-
ences. Figure 5 reports results from an interaction of currency crisis and government
partisanship. Consistent with the view that left governments will be unable to issue in
domestic currency when the market perceives the risks from such issuance as too
high, we find that the positive and significant association between left government
and domestic issuance present during “normal” economic times (relative to cen-
trist/other governments) disappears during periods of wild oscillation in exchange
rates. Interestingly, as reported in Figure 5, periods of macroeconomic disequilibrium
appear to affect right governments’ decisions on currency issuance as well. In particu-
lar, it appears that right governments’ preference for foreign-currency issuance is pro-
nounced when facing monetary crises; in “normal” times, however, right
governments are indistinguishable from centrists in their currency issuance.109
While we leave further refinement of this finding to future research, we note that
this behavior is consistent with efforts by right governments to enforce monetary dis-
cipline through the taking on of additional foreign-currency debts.


Robustness and Extensions
Here, we focus on four key robustness and extension analyses: confirming effects over
time; investigating effects across regime type; employing an alternative coding for par-
tisanship; and incorporating institutional correlates of left government.110


  109. Note that, whatever the crisis conditions, right governments issue lower percentages of domestic-
denominated bonds than left governments, as predicted by Hypothesis 1.
  110. In the appendix, we provide more evidence of the robustness of our results by aggregating all data to
country-year; including short-term (<1 year) issues; and addressing selection considerations.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
58                 International Organization


                                    1.00

                                    0.90




     Proportion domestic currency
                                    0.80

                                    0.70

                                    0.60

                                    0.50

                                    0.40

                                    0.30                                                                Right
                                                                                                        Center/Other
                                                                                                        Left
                                    0.20
                                                  No crisis                      Inflation crisis

                                    1.00

                                    0.90




     Proportion domestic currency
                                    0.80

                                    0.70

                                    0.60

                                    0.50

                                    0.40

                                    0.30                                                                Right
                                                                                                        Center/Other
                                                                                                        Left
                                    0.20
                                                  No crisis                     Currency crisis

 Note: The left panel conditions on a measure of whether the country is facing an inflation crisis,
 while the right panel conditions on a contemporaneous currency crisis (95% confidence intervals).

FIGURE 5. Effect of government partisanship on proportion of domestic-currency
debt issued, depending on crisis environment




                                                             This content downloaded from
                                           191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                                                     All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                             59


Effects over Time
First, we directly confront the question of whether denomination decisions were once pol-
itically relevant but are not anymore, given the boom in domestic issuance (see again
Figure 1). Recall that our specifications include cubic polynomials in time to account
for common secular evolution of dynamics across the entire sample. Still, is the effect
of government ideology that we recover simply an artifact of a particular time period?
    We re-estimate our core specification with dummies for the 1990s and 2000s (with
the 2010s as the excluded category), and interact each decade dummy with our gov-
ernment partisanship measures. The results support our contention that the systematic
relationship between left governments and domestic denomination is consistent and
not an artifact of time,111 with Figure 6 summarizing the key findings. First, both
right and left governments issue greater proportions of domestic-denominated debt
as time goes on. This is consistent with the reality that, given that the boom in domes-
tic denomination is indicative of lower costs of bond terms that include that choice,
right ideology does not force right governments to “look a gift horse in the mouth.”112
Nonetheless, variation in partisan outcomes remains apparent: right governments
issue lower proportions of domestic-denominated debt than left governments in the
1990s, 2000s, and 2010s (data through 2016). This is consistent with our theoretical
argument and implies that partisan preferences are enduring and thus should be rele-
vant whatever the overall market conditions. Also, center/other governments do not
exhibit as clear a trend in issuance, consistent with our theory that these governments
as a category do not have enduring, clear preferences over denomination.
Empirically, their issuance in domestic currency increases from the 1990s to the
2000s; by the 2010s their outcomes are indistinguishable from those of right govern-
ments, and point estimates are consistently lower than left governments.


Subset on Regime Type
Thus far, we have controlled for the possibility of a direct effect of democracy on cur-
rency composition in a sample of all non-OECD countries for which the DPI provides
data on partisanship.113 However, our arguments are premised on the existence of pol-
itical contestation: we expect governments’ domestic incentives to reflect their ideo-
logical leanings, which are ultimately linked to electoral concerns. While all
sovereigns that maintain their own currencies confront the issue of how to denominate



   111. That is, the interaction terms are not significant or substantively meaningful. See Appendix
Table A7 for full regression results.
   112. While our primary measure of partisanship does vary monthly, one might worry that—as our other
primary conditioning variables exhibit only annual variation—the use of country-month as our unit of an-
alysis is inappropriate. We therefore replicate all our core findings at the country-year level (Appendix A5–
A9). While clearly we experience a substantial loss in statistical power when reduced to country-year, our
quantitative findings are reconfirmed using this coarser unit of analysis.
   113. Cruz, Keefer, and Scartascini 2018.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
60   International Organization




 1.00

 0.90

 0.80

 0.70

 0.60

 0.50                                                                             Right
                                                                                  Center/Other
                                                                                  Left
 0.40
               1990s                    2000s                    2010s

  Note: Estimated proportion of domestic-currency-denominated sovereign bonds (in non-OECD
  countries), averaged by government partisanship and decade (95% confidence intervals).

FIGURE 6. Estimated proportion of domestic-currency-denominated sovereign bonds
(in non-OECD countries)


their bond issues, face-value partisanship may thus be a less meaningful predictor of a
nondemocratic regime’s choice over terms. To explore this potential heterogeneity, we
split our data based on a binary measure of democracy.114 Among the subsample of
democracies, the effects of left and right governments are robust (column 1 of
Appendix Table A9). In contrast, in the subset of nondemocracies, left and right parti-
sanship are signed as expected but both lose statistical significance. These results
underscore the importance of research questioning how the politics of sovereign debt
in nondemocracies does or does not reflect that in democracies.115


Alternative Coding for Government Partisanship
While we have so far used a standard source of information on government partisan-
ship by relying on data from the DPI, it is possible that in seeking to fit government
economic ideology into discrete categories the DPI coding may suffer from some
mischaracterizations. Of course, so long as these miscodings of government


  114. Magaloni, Chu, and Min 2013.
  115. Ballard-Rosa 2016, 2020.




                                    This content downloaded from
                  191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                            All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                 Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                              61


partisanship are not systematically associated with the currency composition of gov-
ernment bonds, this measurement error will primarily serve to attenuate any true
effect. Indeed, it is difficult to come up with a reason that such partisan codings
would be likely to lead to directional bias in our primary estimates regarding propor-
tions of domestic-currency denomination.
   However, to further probe the robustness of our main results, we employed new data
from the V-Dem project provided in the V-Party Dataset. These data rely on aggregated
measures of expert codings to identify party characteristics for most political parties in the
world from 1970 to 2019.116 In particular, to match our theoretical interest in partisan pre-
ferences over monetary policy, we draw on V-Party’s coding of parties along an “eco-
nomic left-right scale.” As described in the codebook, left parties “want government to
play an active role in the economy. This includes higher taxes, more regulation and gov-
ernment spending and a more generous welfare state.” Right parties “emphasize a reduced
economic role for government: privatization, lower taxes, less regulation, less government
spending, and a leaner welfare state.” A group of country experts are asked to place parties
on a seven-point scale from “far left” to “far right,” and these estimates are then averaged
according to a Bayesian updating process and centered on zero.
   As we demonstrate in the appendix, when we replace our primary categorical
measure of government partisanship from the DPI with this continuous measure of
government right–left ideology from V-Party, we continue to find that left-leaning
governments are significantly more likely to issue debt in domestic currency.117
We also continue to find evidence for the role of institutional constraints in
shaping the market’s tolerance for issuance of domestic-currency bonds by left gov-
ernments: the effect of a marginal increase toward the left side of the political spec-
trum is significantly associated with expanded domestic issuance only in the presence
of CBI and fixed exchange rates. Similarly, we find that while left governments
outside of crisis environments are significantly more likely to issue in their own cur-
rency, this effect disappears in the presence of ongoing inflation or currency crises
likely to scare investors away from these domestic currencies. Thus, even using a
conceptually distinct measure of government ideology from a completely different
data source, we continue to find strong evidence that partisan preferences shape
bond terms, particularly when markets are willing to tolerate them.



Institutional Correlates of Left Government
An alternative source of concern with our results might arise if there are additional
institutional correlates of partisan governments that might also affect preferences


   116. Luhrmann et al. 2020; Pemstein et al. 2020.
   117. See Appendix Figures A1–A9. To be precise, we regress the proportion of bonds issued in domestic
currency on the left–right ideology of the party that won the largest vote share in the prior election, as well
as our full set of controls described earlier. As in all our results, we code government partisanship in the
month-year that the new government takes office as opposed to the month-year of the election.




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
62    International Organization


over the currency denomination of sovereign debt. One potential institutional factor is
the type of electoral institution in place in a given country; that is, the impact of gov-
ernment partisanship could differ in majoritarian versus proportional-representation
systems.118 As reported in Appendix Table A11, while governments in propor-
tional-representation systems do appear somewhat less likely to issue domestic-
denominated debt, the inclusion of a control for electoral institution type does not
change the substantive size or statistical significance of our core findings of interest
on government partisanship.
   Alternatively, considering the conditioning effects of institutions to constrain mon-
etary policy, while we have accounted for current institutional conditions, one might
worry that left and right governments might have underlying preferences for differing
monetary regimes, and that the length of time since such institutions have been in
place might matter for investor expectations about their durability. We address this
concern in Appendix Table A11 by including measures of the time (in years) a
given country had high levels of CBI (in column 2) or a fixed exchange rate (in
column 4). Note that these direct controls for the length of time under a given insti-
tution do not attenuate our main partisan effects of interest. We also probe this effect
by interacting our measure of government partisanship with the time with high CBI
(in column 3) or with a fixed exchange rate (in column 5). As reported in column 3,
we do recover (weakly) statistically significant results suggesting that the capacity of
left governments to issue more debt in domestic currency is strengthened the longer
that CBI has been in place; this finding is consistent with the left’s ability to issue in
domestic currency being constrained by market expectations over potential monetary
“malfeasance.” However, in column 5 we fail to find any evidence that the length of
time since a fixed exchange rate has been in place has any conditioning influence on
our main findings that left governments issue significantly more, and right govern-
ments significantly less, domestic-denominated debt.119


Conclusion

For developing countries, the expansion of international capital markets in general,
and sovereign bond markets specifically, offers opportunities as well as threats.
Governments have been increasingly able to borrow to fund their activities, but in
doing so they may expose themselves to pressures to enact or avoid certain policies.
Thus financial openness could reduce the ability of governments to achieve their trad-
itional ideological goals and, in turn, to serve their core constituents. The “original
sin” logic offers one version of market-based constraints, in that developing countries


   118. We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion, as well as for the two suggestions reported
later.
   119. In unreported additional specifications, we have also attempted to evaluate whether the “stability”
of the exchange rate mattered (as a function of annual variance in the real dollar exchange rate), but did not
recover any significant results.




                                       This content downloaded from
                     191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                               All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
              Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination              63


were assumed to be unable to find an international market for domestic-denominated
bonds.120 This logic implies that, in seeking credit, developing-country governments
have little or no power over the terms at which they borrow. Instead, supply-side con-
siderations—investors’ preferences—loom very large.
   The boom in the proportion of sovereign bonds issued in domestic currency,
revealed by our data, undermines this expectation. Nonetheless, the new market appe-
tite for domestic-denominated sovereign debt does not erase the importance of
domestic politics to borrowing outcomes. Left governments prefer domestic denom-
ination, preserving future monetary policy flexibility and insulation from depreci-
ation-induced increases in debt repayment costs. Right governments, by contrast,
have an ideological predisposition toward foreign-currency denomination, welcom-
ing the lower costs and macroeconomic constraints it brings. Our analyses offer evi-
dence that left governments in developing countries often are able to achieve their
demand-side preferences: they are significantly more likely to issue debt denomi-
nated in their own currencies. Right governments, on the other hand, have followed
the more general market shift toward domestic-currency borrowing, despite their
underlying ideological predispositions.
   Still, vestiges of the “original sin” dynamic remain: issuing domestic-denominated
sovereign bonds on international markets requires compensation. In our data, we
uncover a systematic correlation between domestic denomination and compensation
in the form of shorter maturities. Future scholarship would do well to pay more atten-
tion to how DMOs conceive of the trade-offs across bond terms, as well as how they
attempt to market their debt to varying groups of investors. Indeed, variation in the
investor base is likely to generate variation in the constraints faced by debtor govern-
ments.121 And, more broadly, political economists have paid much less attention to
the origins and role of DMOs, especially relative to central banks.122
   Also, while left governments find it more difficult to choose domestic denomin-
ation when crisis heightens currency risks, they are better able to come to terms
that include domestic denomination when constrained by an independent central
bank or pegged exchange rate. Hence, supply-side concerns with currency risk are
ameliorated as a result of governments’ other institutional features and choices.
This conditioning effect of national economic institutions points to a need for
greater attention to governments’ choices, not only across financing terms and debt
instruments,123 but also across national economic institutions. Governments reform-
ing their institutions often are making trade-offs across types of constraints. In the
area of sovereign debt, this is especially relevant as international financial institutions
encourage developing-country governments to make their DMOs not only more pro-
fessionalized but also more insulated from political authority.124


  120. Eichengreen, Hausmann, and Panizza 2005.
  121. Schlegl, Trebesch, and Wright 2019; Tomz and Wright 2013.
  122. But see Missale 2000; Sadeh and Porath 2020.
  123. Mosley and Rosendorff n.d.; Bunte 2019.
  124. Blommestein and Horman 2007; Missale 2000; Sadeh and Rubinson 2018.




                                This content downloaded from
              191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                        All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
64    International Organization


   Finally, our data reveal massive changes in the marketplace for assets involving
domestic currencies, which speak to the debate over whether economic globalization
leads toward convergence on a small number of global reserve currencies. Such con-
vergence would privilege countries whose currencies sit atop the global pyramid
while reducing the power of others,125 and it would weaken other countries’ access
to the state-building benefits that come with national currencies.126 Consistent with
the “currency as power” narrative, the dollar and the euro are key currencies for
many international transactions; issuers of global reserve currencies experience a
variety of benefits; and governments such as China seek to increase the international
use of their currencies.127 Nonetheless, it is clear from our data that many currencies
now feature in global sovereign debt markets. Private investors in these markets seem
to have appetites for portfolios including developing-country currencies—and to
have been able to come to terms that include sufficient compensation to whet
those appetites. For the 131 sovereign issuers covered in our data (1990 to 2016),
national currencies remain very much alive.


Data Availability Statement

Replication files for this article may be found at <https://doi.org/10.7910/DVN/
RREGA1>.



Supplementary Material

Supplementary material for this article is available at <https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0020818321000357>.



References

Adams, James, Andrea B. Haupt, and Heather Stoll. 2008. What Moves Parties? The Role of Public
  Opinion and Global Economic Conditions in Western Europe. Comparative Political Studies 42 (5):
  611–39.
Aizenman, Joshua, Yothin Jinjarak, Donghyun Park, and Huanhuan Zheng. 2020. Good-Bye Original Sin,
  Hello Risk On-Off, Financial Fragility, and Crises? Working Paper 27030, National Bureau of Economic
  Research.
Alesina, A., and H. Rosenthal. 1995. Partisan Politics, Divided Government and the Economy. Cambridge
  University Press.



  125. Cohen 2015.
  126. Helleiner 2003; McDowell 2021.
  127. Broz, Zhang, and Wang 2018; Liao and McDowell 2016.




                                     This content downloaded from
                   191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                             All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                         65


Arellano, Cristina, and Ananth Ramanarayanan. 2012. Default and the Maturity Structure in Sovereign
  Bonds. Journal of Political Economy 120 (2):187–32.
Ballard-Rosa, Cameron. 2016. Hungry for Change: Urban Bias and Autocratic Sovereign Default.
  International Organization 70 (2):313–46.
Ballard-Rosa, Cameron. 2020. Democracy, Dictatorship, and Default. Cambridge University Press.
Ballard-Rosa, Cameron, Layna Mosley, and Rachel L. Wellhausen. 2021. Contingent Advantage?
  Sovereign Borrowing, Democratic Institutions, and Global Capital Cycles. British Journal of Political
  Science 51 (1):353–73.
Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. 1983. Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary
  Policy. Journal of Monetary Economics 12 (1):101–21.
Barta, Zsófia, and Alison Johnston. 2018. Rating Politics? Partisan Discrimination in Credit Ratings in
  Developed Economies. Comparative Political Studies 51 (5):587–620.
Bauerle Danzman, Sarah, W. Kindred Winecoff, and Thomas Oatley. 2017. All Crises Are Global: Capital
  Cycles in an Imbalanced International Political Economy. International Studies Quarterly 61 (4):907–23.
Beaulieu, Emily, Gary W. Cox, and Sebastian Saiegh. 2012. Sovereign Debt and Regime Type:
  Reconsidering the Democratic Advantage. International Organization 66 (4):709–38.
Bernard, William. 2002. Banking on Reform: Political Parties and Central Bank Independence in the
  Industrial Democracies. University of Michigan Press.
Bernhard, William, and David Leblang. 2006. Democratic Processes and Financial Markets. Cambridge
  University Press.
Betz, Timm, and Amy Pond. 2019. How Governments Privilege Their Own Debt. Presented at the
  American Political Science Association annual meeting, Washington, DC, 29 August–1 September.
Biglaiser, Glen, and Joseph L. Staats. 2012. Finding the “Democratic Advantage” in Sovereign Bond
  Ratings: The Importance of Strong Courts, Property Rights Protection, and the Rule of Law.
  International Organization 66 (3):515–35.
Bisgaard, Martin. 2015. Bias Will Find a Way: Economic Perceptions, Attributions of Blame, and Partisan-
  Motivated Reasoning During Crisis. Journal of Politics 77 (3):849–60.
Blommestein, Hans J., and Greg Horman. 2007. Government Debt Management and Bond Markets in
  Africa. Financial Market Trends 2007 (1):217–44.
Bodea, Cristina, and Raymond Hicks. 2015. International Finance and Central Bank Independence:
  Institutional Diffusion and the Flow and Cost of Capital. Journal of Politics 77 (1):268–84.
Bodea, Cristina, and Raymond Hicks. 2018. Sovereign Credit Ratings and Central Banks: Why Do
  Analysts Pay Attention to Institutions? Economics and Politics 30 (3):340–65.
Borri, Nicola, and Kirill Shakhnov. 2018. Limited Participation and Local Currency Sovereign Debt.
  Available at <https://ssrn.com/abstract=2978127>.
Bradley, Michael, Irving De Lira Salvatierra, and G. Mitu Gulati. 2016. A Sovereign’s Cost of Capital: Go
  Foreign or Stay Local. Duke Law School Public Law and Legal Theory Series, 2015–50.
Brooks, Sarah, Raphael Cunha, and Layna Mosley. 2015. Categories, Creditworthiness, and Contagion:
  How Investors’ Shortcuts Affect Sovereign Debt Markets. International Studies Quarterly 59 (3):
  587–601.
Brooks, Sarah M., Rafael Cuhna, and Layna Mosley. 2021. Elections, Ideology, and Experience?
  Sovereign Bond Investors and Government Change. Working paper, Ohio State University.
Brooks, Sarah M., and Marcus J. Kurtz. 2007. Capital, Trade, and the Political Economies of Reform.
  American Journal of Political Science 51 (4):703–20.
Broz, J. Lawrence, Zhiwen Zhang, and Gaoyang Wang. 2018. Explaining Foreign Interest in China’s
  Global Leadership. Available at <https://ssrn.com/abstract=3138278>.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Alastair Smith, Randolph M. Siverson, and James D. Morrow. 2005. The Logic
  of Political Survival. MIT Press.
Bunte, Jonas B. 2019. Raise the Debt: How Developing Countries Choose Their Creditors. Oxford
  University Press.
Campello, Daniela. 2014. The Politics of Financial Booms and Crises: Evidence from Latin America.
  Comparative Political Studies 47 (2):260–86.




                                  This content downloaded from
                191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
66    International Organization


Campello, Daniela. 2015. The Politics of Market Discipline in Latin America: Globalization and
  Democracy. Cambridge University Press.
Carlsen, Fredrik. 2000. Unemployment, Inflation and Government Popularity: Are There Partisan Effects?
  Electoral Studies 19:141–50.
Carter, David B., and Curtis S. Signorino. 2010. Back to the Future: Modeling Time Dependence in Binary
  Data. Political Analysis 18 (3):271–92.
Chamon, Marcos, Julian Schumacher, and Christoph Trebesch. 2018. Foreign-Law Bonds: Can They
  Reduce Sovereign Borrowing Costs? Journal of International Economics 114:164–79.
Chinn, Menzie D., and Hiro Ito. 2006. What Matters for Financial Development? Capital Controls,
  Institutions, and Interactions. Journal of Development Economics 81 (1):163–92.
Cho, Hye Jee. 2014. The Impact of IMF Programs on Perceived Creditworthiness of Emerging Market
  Countries: Is There a “Nixon-Goes-to-China” Effect? International Studies Quarterly 58 (2):302–21.
Chwieroth, Jeffrey. 2007. Neoliberal Economists and Capital Account Liberalization in Emerging Markets.
  International Organization 61 (2):443–63.
Chwieroth, Jeffrey. 2009. Capital Ideas: The IMF and the Rise of Financial Liberalization. Princeton
  University Press.
Clark, William Robert, and Mark Hallerberg. 2000. Mobile Capital, Domestic Institutions, and Electorally
  Induced Monetary and Fiscal Policy. American Political Science Review 94 (2):323–46.
Cohen, Benjamin J. 2015. Currency Power: Understanding Monetary Rivalry. Princeton University Press.
Copelovitch, Mark. 2010. The IMF in the Global Economy. Cambridge University Press.
Cox, Gary, and Sebastian Saiegh. 2018. Executive Constraint and Sovereign Debt: Quasi-Experimental
  Evidence from Argentina During the Baring Crisis. Comparative Political Studies 51 (11):1504–25.
Cruz, Cesi, Philip Keefer, and Carlos Scartascini. 2018. Database of Political Institutions 2017 (DPI2017).
  Data set.
Cruz, Cesi, and Christina J. Schneider. 2017. Foreign Aid and Undeserved Credit Claiming. American
  Journal of Political Science 61 (2):396–408.
Datz, Giselle. 2008. Governments as Market Players: State Innovation in the Global Economy. Journal of
  International Affairs 64 (1):35–49.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Ricardo Hausmann. 1999. Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility. Working Paper
  w7418, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Eichengreen, Barry, Ricardo Hausmann, and Ugo Panizza. 2005. The Mystery of Original Sin. In Other
  People’s Money: Debt Denomination and Financial Instability in Emerging Market Economies,
  edited by Barry Eichengreen and Ricardo Hausmann, 233–65. University of Chicago Press.
Engel, Charles, and Jungjae Park. 2018. Debauchery and Original Sin: The Currency Composition of
  Sovereign Debt. Working Paper 24671, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Esping-Andersen, Gosta. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton University Press.
Franzese, Robert J. 1999. Partially Independent Central Banks, Politically Responsive Governments, and
  Inflation. American Journal of Political Science 43 (3):681–706.
Frot, Emmanuel, and Javier Santiso. 2013. Political Uncertainty and Portfolio Managers in Emerging
  Economies. Review of International Political Economy 20 (1):26–51.
Garrett, Geoffrey. 1998. Shrinking States? Globalization and National Autonomy in the OECD. Oxford
  Development Studies 26 (1):71–97.
Garriga, Ana Carolina. 2016. Central Bank Reforms in the World: A New Dataset. International
  Interactions 42 (5):849–68.
Garriga, Ana Carolina, and Cesar M. Rodriguez. 2020. More Effective than We Thought: Central Bank
  Independence and Inflation in Developing Countries. Economic Modelling 85(C):87–105.
Gelpern, Anna. 2018. About Government Debt … Who Knows? Capital Markets Law Journal 13:321–55.
Gray, Julia. 2013. The Company States Keep: International Economic Organizations and Investor
  Perceptions. Cambridge University Press.
Gray, Julia, and Jeffrey Kucik. 2017. Leadership Turnover and the Durability of International Trade
  Commitments. Comparative Political Studies 50 (14):1941–72.




                                      This content downloaded from
                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
               Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                        67


Gupta, Sanjeev, Estelle X. Liu, and Carlos Mulas-Granados. 2015. Now or Later? The Political Economy
   of Public Investment in Democracies. IMF Working Paper 15 (175).
Harmes, Adam. 2012. The Rise of Neoliberal Nationalism. Review of International Political Economy
   19 (1):59–86.
Helleiner, Eric. 2003. The Making of National Money: Territorial Currencies in Historical Perspective.
   Cornell University Press.
Hibbs, D. 1987. The American Political Economy. Harvard University Press.
Hibbs, D. 1994. The Partisan Model of Macroeconomic Cycles: More Theory and Evidence for the United
   States. Economics and Politics 6:1–23.
Huber, Evelyne, and John D. Stephens. 2012. Democracy and the Left: Social Policy and Inequality in
  Latin America. University of Chicago Press.
Jensen, Nathan, and Scott Schmith. 2005. Market Responses to Politics: The Rise of Lula and the Decline
  of the Brazilian Stock Market. Comparative Political Studies 38 (10):1245–70.
Johnson, Juliet. 2016. Priests of Prosperity: How Central Bankers Transformed the Postcommunist World.
   Cornell University Press.
Kaplan, Stephen. 2013. Globalization and Austerity Politics in Latin America. Cambridge University
   Press.
Kaplan, Stephen, and Kaj Thomsson. 2017. The Political Economy of Sovereign Debt: Global Finance and
   Electoral Cycles. Journal of Politics 79 (2):605–23.
Kurzer, Paulette. 1993. Business and Banking: Political Change and Economic Integration in Western
   Europe. Cornell University Press.
Leblang, David A. 2002. The Political Economy of Speculative Attacks in the Developing World.
   International Studies Quarterly 46 (1):69–91.
Li, Quan, and Dale L. Smith. 2002. The Dilemma of Financial Liberalization: State Autonomy and Societal
   Demands. Journal of Politics 64 (3):764–90.
Liao, Steven, and Daniel McDowell. 2016. No Reservations: International Order and Demand for the
  Renminbi as a Reserve Currency. International Studies Quarterly 60 (2):272–93.
Luhrmann, Anna, N. Düpont, M. Higashijima, Y.B. Kavasogly, K.L. Marquardt, et al. 2020. Varieties of
  Party Identity and Organization (V-Party) Dataset V1. Varieties of Democracy Project.
Magaloni, Beatriz, Johnathan Chu, and Eric Min. 2013. Autocracies of the World, 1950-2012 (Version
  1.0). Data set, Stanford University.
Maxfield, Sylvia. 1997. Gatekeepers of Growth: The International Political Economy of Central Banking
  in Developing Countries. Princeton University Press.
McDowell, Daniel. 2021. Financial Sanctions and Political Risk in the International Currency System.
  Review of International Political Economy 28 (3):635–61.
Melecky, Martin. 2007. A Cross-Country Analysis of Public Debt Management Strategies. Policy Research
  Working Paper 4287, World Bank.
Melecky, Martin. 2012. Choosing the Currency Structure of Foreign-Currency Debt: A Review of Policy
  Approaches. Journal of International Development 24:133–51.
Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélene Rey. 2015. World Asset Markets and the Global Financial Cycle.
  Working paper, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Missale, Alessandro. 2000. Public Debt Management. Oxford University Press.
Mitchener, Kris James, and Marc C. Weidemaier. 2015. Was the Classical Gold Standard Credible on the
  Periphery? Evidence from Currency Risk. Journal of Economic History 75 (2):479–511.
Mosley, Layna. 2003. Global Capital and National Governments. Cambridge University Press.
Mosley, Layna, Victoria Paniagua, and Erik Wibbels. 2020. Moving Markets? Government Bond Investors
   and Microeconomic Policy Changes. Economics and Politics 5 (2):197–249.
Mosley, Layna, and B. Peter Rosendorff. n.d. Government Choices Across Borrowing Strategies.
  Unpublished manuscript, New York University.
Muller, Andreas, Kjetil Storesletten, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. 2016. The Political Color of Fiscal
  Responsibility. Journal of the European Economic Association 14 (1):252–302.
Nelson, Stephen C. 2014. Playing Favorites: How Shared Beliefs Shape the IMF’s Lending Decisions.
  International Organization 68 (2):297–328.




                                  This content downloaded from
                191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                          All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
68    International Organization


North, Douglass C., and Barry R. Weingast. 1989. Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of
  Institutions Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England. Journal of Economic History
  49 (4):803–32.
Ottonello, Pablo, and Diego J. Perez. 2019. The Currency Composition of Sovereign Debt. American
  Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 11 (3):174–208.
Parker-Stephen, Evan. 2013. Clarity of Responsibility and Economic Evaluations. Electoral Studies 32 (3):
  506–11.
Pemstein, Daniel, Kyle M. Marquardt, Eitan Tzelgov, Yi-ting Wang, Juraj Medzihorsky, et al. 2020. The
  V-Dem Measurement Model: Latent Variable Analysis for Cross-National and Cross-Temporal Expert-
  Coded Data. Working Paper 21, 5th ed., Varieties of Democracy Institute, University of Gothenburg.
Pinto, Pablo M. 2013. Partisan Investment in the Global Economy: Why the Left Loves Foreign Direct
  Investment and FDI Loves the Left. Cambridge University Press.
Pond, Amy, and Timm Betz. 2019. Governments as Borrowers and Regulators. Presented at the American
  Political Science Association annual meeting, Washington, DC, 29 August–1 September.
Presbitero, Andrea F., Dhaneshwar Ghura, Olumuyiwa S. Adedeji, and Lamin Njie. 2016. Sovereign
  Bonds in Developing Countries: Drivers of Issuance and Spreads. Review of Development Finance 6
  (1):1–15.
Przeworski, Adam, and Michael Wallerstein. 1988. Structural Dependence of the State on Capital.
  American Political Science Review 82 (1):11–29.
Quinn, Dennis P., and Carla Inclan. 1997. The Origins of Financial Openness: A Study of Current and
  Capital Account Liberalization. American Journal of Political Science 41 (3):771–813.
Rey, Hélène. 2013. Dilemma not Trilemma: The Global Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence.
  Proceedings, Economic Policy Symposium, Jackson Hole, Available at <http://ideas.repec.org/a/fip/
  fedkpr/y2013x9.html>.
Rommerskirchen, Charlotte. 2020. Foreign Bond Investors and Market Discipline. Competition and
  Change 24 (1):3–25.
Sadeh, Tal, and Yehuda Porath. 2020. Autonomous Agencies and Relational Contracts in Government
  Bond Issues. Regulation and Governance 14 (4):741–763.
Sadeh, Tal, and Eyal Rubinson. 2018. Do the IMF and World Bank Promote Autonomous Sovereign Debt
  Management? Presented at Political Economy of International Organization conference, University of
  Wisconsin–Madison, 8–10 February.
Saiegh, Sebastian. 2005. Do Countries Have a “Democratic Advantage”? Political Institutions, Multilateral
  Agencies, and Sovereign Borrowing. Comparative Political Studies 38 (4):366–87.
Schlegl, Matthias, Christoph Trebesch, and Mark Wright. 2019. The Seniority Structure of Sovereign Debt.
  Working Paper 25793, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Schultz, Kenneth A., and Barry R. Weingast. 2003. The Democratic Advantage: Institutional Foundations
  of Financial Power in International Competition. International Organization 57 (1):3–42.
Simmons, Beth A. 1997. Who Adjusts? Domestic Sources of Foreign Economic Policy During the Interwar
  Years. Princeton University Press.
Spanakos, Anthony Peter, and Lucio R. Renno. 2009. Speak Clearly and Carry a Big Stock of Dollar
  Reserves: Sovereign Risk, Ideology, and Presidential Elections in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and
  Venezuela. Comparative Political Studies 42 (1):1292–316.
Stasavage, David. 2011. States of Credit: Size, Power and the Development of European Polities. Princeton
  University Press.
Stokes, Susan C. 2001. Mandates and Democracy: Neoliberalism by Surprise in Latin America.
  Cambridge University Press.
Stone, Randall. 2011. Controlling Institutions: International Organizations and the Global Economy.
  Cambridge University Press.
Tomz, Michael. 2007. Reputation and International Cooperation: Sovereign Debt Across Three Centuries.
  Princeton University Press.
Tomz, Michael, and Mark L.J. Wright. 2013. Empirical Research on Sovereign Debt and Default. Annual
  Review of Economics 5:247–72.




                                      This content downloaded from
                    191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                              All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
                Coming to Terms: The Politics of Sovereign Bond Denomination                           69


Vaaler, Paul M., Burkhard N. Schrage, and Steven A. Block. 2006. Elections, Opportunism, Partisanship
  and Sovereign Ratings in Developing Countries. Review of Development Economics 10 (1):154–70.
Vreeland, James Raymond. 2003. The IMF and Economic Growth. Cambridge University Press.
Weidemaier, Mark, and Mitu Gulati. 2016. International Finance and Sovereign Debt. In Oxford Handbook
  of Law and Economics, chapter 23. Oxford University Press.
Wellhausen, Rachel. 2015. Bondholders v. Direct Investors? Competing Responses to Expropriation.
  International Studies Quarterly 59 (4):750–64.
Wibbels, Erik. 2006. Dependency Revisited: International Markets, Business Cycles, and Social Spending
  in the Developing World. International Organization 60:433–68.
World Bank. 2006. Global Development Finance 2006: The Development Potential of Surging Capital
  Flows (Vol. 2): Summary and Country Tables.
Zeitz, Alexandra. 2019. The Financial Statecraft of Debtors: The Political Economy of External Finance in
  Africa. PhD dissertation, St. Antony’s College, Oxford University.



Authors
Cameron Ballard-Rosa is Associate Professor of Political Science at the University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill. He can be reached at cambr@email.unc.edu.
Layna Mosley is Professor of Politics and International Affairs at Princeton University. She can be reached
at layna.mosley@princeton.edu.
Rachel L. Wellhausen is Associate Professor of Government at the University of Texas in Austin. She can
be reached at rwellhausen@utexas.edu.



Acknowledgments
Previous versions of this paper were presented at the 2018 International Political Economy Society
meeting, the 2019 DebtCon meeting, the 2019 American Political Science Association meeting,
New York University, Princeton University, and UC San Diego. We thank participants in those events,
as well as B. Peter Rosendorff, Thomas Sattler, and two anonymous reviewers, for comments. Robert
Galantucci and Mitch Watkins helped compile bond issue data; Devin Case-Ruchala and Bailee
Donahue researched debt management practices; Kelly Kennedy and Benjamin Roberts helped compile
credit rating and election data; and students at Innovations for Peace and Development at UT Austin
researched case illustrations.



Key Words
Sovereign debt; bond terms; denomination; currency; emerging markets; partisanship

Date received: February 10, 2020; Date accepted: March 13, 2021




                                   This content downloaded from
                 191.181.59.113 on Fri, 27 Feb 2026 21:22:10 UTC
                           All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms
